
.. |lp| replace:: language production
.. _articulation: Articulation.html
.. _conceptualization: Conceptualization.html
.. _discourse: Discourse.html
.. _speech production: Speech_production.html

================================================================================
Language Production
================================================================================

**Language production** refers to process of producing `discourse`_, from
`conceptualization`_ to `articulation`_, in the form of `speech production`_ or
`writing`.

.. contents::

History
================================================================================

Until relatively recently (this is from 2006), neither linguists or
psycholinguists paid much attention to the normal process of adult |lp|.

Studying how people talk is hard and easy to dismiss as a viable scientific
problem. Both of these issues have receded. By 2006, there were valid, reliable
methods for getting at the underpinnings of production, burgeoning scientific
interest in the |lp| ability.

Research
================================================================================

Presently, most research focuses on how speakers accomplish seemingly simple
goals; producing utterances in a particular language.

At the outset, this calls for being able to think in ways that readily converted
into language or "thinking for speaking".

It means bringing to mind words or morphemes that are suitable for conveying the
thought, arranging the words or morphemes in the way that is grammatical and
semantically meaningful, and producing the sound with one's throat.

For example, consider describing where one lives. One could use a coordinate
system to precisely say so. However, this is unlikely to successfully
communicate the idea. A better tactic is to take account of the context of the
conversation and what the listener knows to consider "common ground". (An
important aspect is the ability of the speaker to retrieve information about the
listener from memory.)

Having sketched some thought with the intention of communicating it, the speaker
has the beginnings of a "message". To the transform the message into language
and then into speech means retrieving from memory words from the `lexicon`,
arranging them into a sentence, and then forming the syllables at a fast rate.



.. [1] "Spoken Language Production: Psycholinguistic Approach (Bock, Konopka, Middleton)"
.. [2] "Speaking and Misspeaking (Dell)"

---


## Conclusion

- Conclude with three question that remain puzzles: - From a linguistic
  standpoint, how does LP relate to language comprehension?  - Do grammar and
  lexicon function in the same way during production and comprehension?  - From
  a psycholinguistic standpoint, the key question about LP is how speakers put
  their knowledge of language to use along wither their perceptual, attentional,
  conceptual, and motor abilities to adequately convey particular meaning at
  particular places and times to particular audiences.  - A grammar must be
  dynamic and configured in a way that fluently interfaces with a speaker's
  perceptions, thoughts, and other actions to support efficienct communication.
  - The problem of integrating language with other cognitive and motor abilities
    is at the core of debates about modularity of a language and languages
    processes, a debate that is as relevant to the pheonomena of LP as to
    language acquisition and comprehension.  - If language abilities are no
    different in kind from other mental functions and skills, the question of
    integration, of interfacing language with other abilities, simply does not
    arise. What has to explaned, from this pespective, is how the stuff of
    general cognition can work to yield the human capacity to learn and use
    language.

- If language is different in kind from other abilities, i.e, a genetically
  distinctive human endowment, the explanatory challenge is greater.

---


## The Freudian Approach

Many people think slips result from a conflict of what one plans to say and some
unconscious intention. That slips tend to create words over nonwords (Baars
1975) seems to support the claim.

However it is a big jump to claim that revealed unintended thoughts were
repressed and that the slip actually has the function of giving through
expression.

## A Cognitive Science Approach



## Word Errors and the Building of Sentences

One of the most striking facts about slips is that they obey a syntactic
category rule. When one word erroneously replaces another, most of the time the
target and substituting words are of the same syntactic category. (i.e. nouns
slip with nouns, verb with verbs, etc)

One way to account for these facts is to assume that these error occurring
during the construction of syntactic representation of the utterance.
Superficially, it has been suggested  the processing goes like this: Based on
the intended meaning of the utterance (the semantic representation), words are
retrieved from the mental lexicon, the store of words we already know.
Furthermore, a syntactic frame is constructed that indicates the potential
structure of the sentence, which can be thought of as tree that indicates the
grammatical relations among the words in the sentence. The frame by itself
however does not initially contain any words; it has empty slots for the words
to go into, slots that are assumed to be labeled for a syntactic category. The
labels on the slots are assumed to guide insertion.

Word errors that obey the syntactic category rule provide good evidence for the
idea that sentences are built by placing words units in labeled slots in
syntactic frames. The suggests the error ultimate arise because of the need for
the syntactic level to be creative. This is possible because the system
separates syntactic patterns (the frame) from the words, with the result that
the system implies the existence of sentences other than those may have already
been produced.


## Semantic and Phonological Relations in Word Errors

## Phonological Errors

## Word and Sound Error and Linguistic Creativity

## Conclusions - Slips and Cognitive Science

We began by promising to take a cognitive science approach rather than Freudian
one. We sought explanation for the properties of slips by looking at the nature
of language and how it is produced, rather than by looking at repressed memory.

Computational models. By translating one theory's into a computer program, one
can see whether the theory in facts behaves the way one expects it to. This
translation has been particularly important for account for speech error data
because there are so many factors at working producing errors.

## Further Reading

---

How people express their words into thoughts

- Expressing ideas helps to form them. - PG

---

* Syntactic category was very strong for evidence of the frame structure. (Nouns
  for nouns, verbs for verbs) This error has little to do with meaning, sounds,
  or location in sentence.

- Reread Semantic and Phonological Relations in Word Errors (7.6, Dell) -
  Influence of sounds on which word is being selected

* Common ground is the knowledge we both know each other know. Either obvious
  things or from history. Common ground is subjective.


---- # Word-finding

Because messages are not represented linguistically, appropriate words must be
retrieved from the mental dictionary in a speaker's memory.

Lexical entries may be located on the basis of:

1. Meaning 2. Syntactic category information 3. Morphological or phonological
   forms.

Entries are accessible (1) from messages, (2) from the structural procedures
that play out words into connected speech, and (3) from sound.

These multiple avenues make the lexical entryway (1) a busy intersection in the
process of production, as well as in comprehension and (2) a target of research
aimed at uncovering how the intersection works.

## Forces in Word Finding - Context, codability, and word frequency

The semantic and phonological properties of words are linked respectively to two
powerful forces in word finding:

1. Conceptual accessibility 2. Word-form frequency

The meaning of words vary in how specific they are. Because retrieve ability
depends in part on (1) the goodness of the match between the retrieval context
and (2) the information associated with a word's meaning in memory, contexts
with many relevant cues can faciliate naming in comparison to contexts with
fewer cues.

Complementary, words with sparser semantic representations (e.g. proper names
and abstract words) are harder to retrieve than words with richer
representations (e.g. concrete words) other things being equal.

The familiarity of words (whether due to frequency with which they are produced
or the age at which they were learned) has been known to affect how quickly or
easily they are uttered. Higher-frequency words are produced faster than
lower-frequency words. The phenomenon of "Frequency Inheritance" suggest that
frequency affects the retrieval of word forms more than access to lexical
entries proper. Frequency Inheritance refers to a finding the producing of
low-frequency words benefit from the presence in the lexicon of high-frequency
homophones that are unrelated in meaning..

* A lemma is an idea that can be expressed by one word. For example, we have
  none for "dead tree", but we have one for "dead body", that is "corpse".
  Linguistic notion. Needs one single word.  *A word with aliases "couch",
  "sofa" has two lemmas for once concept. Words have connotation though so it's
  hardly possible.

---


# Connectionist Models of Aphasia and Other Language Impairments

## Introduction

Theorists have used models in order to make sense of the variety of symptoms of
aphasia.

Example: In 1885, Lichtheim diagrammed the relation between aphasic syndromes
and brain regions.

- A model mediates between scientific observation and a theory that explains
  those observations.  - A model teaches us about the theory and helps us
  understand why particular findings follow from the theory.

Example: Flow-chart Example: Box-and-arrows

A computational model is a model that is expressed as a computer program.

A computational model is helpful for determining the consequences of damage to
components in complex or probabilistic models.

A connectionist model is a computational model.  A connectionist model is a
network of units that connect to one another through links (connections) that
can vary in strength.

Some models have a learning component that determines the connection weights.

A model that has a learning component must be trained by giving it many trials.

An input activation pattern and (typically) a desired output activation pattern
compose a trial.

Each unit ("node") has an activation value (usually a real number between 0 and
1).

The activation value of a unit changes over time as activation passes through
connections from unit to unit.

Each connection has a strength ("weight").

An excitatory connection is a connection that has positive strength.  An
inhibitory connection is a connection that has negative strength.

Processing is a mapping from an input to an output.  Processing is carried out
by spreading activation.

1. A model is given an input by setting the activation levels of some of its
   input units to particular values.  2. The activation spreads in parallel
   throughout the network via the connections.  3. The output of the model is
   determined by examining the activation levels of a set of output units.

An activation rule is an equation that specifies how the activation value of
each unit changes when it receives activation from its neighboring units.

Activation rules govern the spread.

Example: The input to a model of word retrieval during production might consist
in setting the activations of units representing semantic features of the sought
after word to positive values. The output units might represent the phonemes or
phonetic features of the retrieved word.

Note: Although connectionist researchers use computers at tools, they often
reject the computational metaphor for cognition - the idea that the brain is
much like a standard computer and that cognition is the product of programming.

Connectionist models are inspired by neural systems.

Example: Connectiont model mimic assumption that the brain process information
in parallel, whereas Von Neumna architectures carry out instructions
sequentially.

Connectionist modelers rarely link model parts with brain regions. Rather,
connectionist modelers aim to correctly characterize the cognitive mechanisms of
language processing, with the hopes these mechanisms can be identified with
brain areas.

Connectionist models have been applied to language disorders for more than 20
years.

## The Interactive Two-Step Model of Lexical Retrieval in Aphasic Speakers

The interactive two-step model is a model of single-word production that is
derived from a general theory of production in which linguistic units are
retrieved by spreading activation in a layered network.

The interactive two-step model is an interactive lexical retrieval process.

The units in the network create localist representations; the units in the
network correspond directly to particular linguistic units.

Note: The alternative is distributed representation, in which linguistic units
correspond to a pattern of activation across many network units rather than to a
single unit.

Each connection in the interactive two-step model is excitatory.  Each
connection in the interactive two-step model runs between adjacent layers.

A top-down connection is a connection that goes toward an output node.

An interactive retrieval process is a retrieval process that has both top-down
and bottom-up connections.

Word retrieval and phonological retrieval compose lexical retrieval.

### Word Retrieval

The word retrieval step begins with a jolt of activation to the semantic
features of the targets word.  This activation spread throughout the network,
down to word and phoneme units and upward as well.  The most active word is
selected after a period of time, which completes the word retrieval step.

The activation of all units has random variation.

Words related to a target in phonological form gain activation during the word
retrieval steps.

A lexical error is a ...

A formal error is an error that occurs when a form-related word is selected.

A mixed error is an error that occurs when a word that is semantically and
formally related to the target is selected.

TODO: Selected by whom?

### Phonological Retrieval

The phonological retrieval step begins with a jolt of activation to the lexical
units of the selected word.

Then, activation spreads throughout the network, down to phoneme units and
upward to semantics.

Finally, the most active phoneme unit is selected.

A phonological error is an error that occurs when a selected phoneme does not
correspond to a selected word unit.

A phonological error can produce a non-word or a word (which would create a
formal error).

Note: A formal error can occur at either the word retrieval step or the
phonological retrieval step.  Note: A phonological error can be made on top of a
lexical error. (Such errors are uncommon in normal speakers, but are not
uncommon in aphasic speech.)

The continuity thesis is the assumption of the account of aphasia of the model
that states aphasic errors are generated from the same mechanisms that create
speech errors in unimpaired errors.

### Simulating Naming in Control Subjects

 
### Specifying the Nature of Lesions in the Model

To lesion a model is to alter it in some way so that the model performs less
accurately.

Example: Aphasia models have two lesionable parameters: the strength of
bidirectional connections between semantic and lexical units and the strength of
those between phonological and lexical units.

### Fitting the Model to Naming Data

Example: Schwartz 2006.

### Testing Predictions from the Model

A model is valid if it can generate predictions that are verified.

Example: Model's account of picture naming can be used to predict performance on
word repetition.

The interactive two-step mode assumes that all the connections of a particular
type have the same weight. Clearly this is wrong. The strength of connection
should reflect differences in an individual's experience with words.

Example: Lexical experience has strong effect on aphasic errors as these errors
are more likely on low-frequency and late-acquired words.

## A Parallel Distributed Processing Model of Naming Errors in Optic Aphasia

The parallel distributed processing (PDP) model is designed to mimic the
impairment of optic aphasia.

Optic aphasia causes patients to make errors when naming visually presented
objects. However, it does not impair naming objects presented in other
modalities nor tests of visual recognition.

To develop the optic aphasia model, Plaut and Shallice modified the deep
dyslexia model, lesioned it to simulate brain damage, and compared its response
to those of optic aphasics.

### Initial Model Architecture

The model assumes optic aphasia (like deep dyslexia) stems from an impairment in
accessing semantic representation from visual representations.

PS constructed a model that accesses semantic information in two stages:

1. A rough approximation of the object's semantics is generated from its visual
   reprsentation (direct pathway) 2. This approximation is iteratively refined
   to the precise semantics of the object (indirect pathway)

The direct pathway of the model consists of:

1. A visual input layer 2. An intermediate layer 3. A semantic output layer

Top-down excitatory connections link the visual input layer to the intermediate
layer Top-down excitatory connections link the intermediate layer to the
semantic layer.

Representations in the optic aphasia model are distributed.

Example: The visual representation of "spoon" consists of a pattern of activity
over many units in the visual layer rather than the activation of a single node.

The units of the input layer represent the visual information available from
object recognition.

Subgroups of these units code different visual features.

Similarly, the semantic output layer has subgroups of units that code different
semantic features.

The intermediate units mediate between the input and output layer.

Distributed representation reflect similarity. Related objects will have similar
patterns of activation over the units of the model.

### Training: Setting the Model's Long-Term Connection Weights

The architecture of the model specifies the units and the potential connection
between them, but the connection weights must be learned.

### Lesioning and Testing the Model

### Comparing Model Behavior with Patient Performance

## Aphasic Lexical Access in Sentence Production

## Summary and Conclusion

We are far from a unified model of aphasia.

Models are as diverse as data.

Some models appeal to connectionist learning principles to explain the data.
Some models attribute error effect to interactive spreading activation.  Some do
both.

Despite differences, connection approaches share a cooperative view of language
processing.

Cooperative view of language Processing:

Although the models have separate network levels that correspond to distinct
representational types, the levels work together to explain empirical phenomena.

We might describe an error as "semantic" or "phonological" but that does not
mean that responsibility for the error lies within a single level.

We see multi-level effects in model with a bidirectional or interactive flow of
activation.

Connectionist models allow for multiple levels to affect processing through
learning.

The cooperative view of language has much to offer research on communication
disorders.

---

Researchers try to fit models to predict aphasic behavior on some task, then
test it on another related task.
