
.. _language comprehension: Language_comprehension.html
.. |Rt| replace:: Relevance theory
.. |rt| replace:: relevance theory

================================================================================
Relevance theory
================================================================================

Relevance theory is a `psychological theory of communication` proposed by `Dan
Sperber` and `Deidre Wilson`.

|Rt| details the process of `meaning interpretation` in `communicative
situations`.

|Rt| lends itself to empirical investigation of:

- The processes involved in `language comprehension`_

- The validity of the notion of cognitive effort (the path of least effort to
  successful process the utterance) or of communicative competence

- The nature of the development of pragmatic language comprehension

|Rt| provides a comprehensive account of how undetermined language expressions
can be interpreted in context.[1]

RT: Looking at language structure alone ignores the reality of the communicative
situation where the interpretation of meaning by the hearer often involves
understanding more than the meaning of the words and inferences alone. (Grice
1989)

Meaning in communication is said to be derived from the context in which the
communication takes place.

Support: Utterances such as "He was late again" can be produced in different
contexts with different meanings.  Support: Words are frequently undetermined
and much of the meaning intended by the speaker is derived from intonation,
gesture, eye gaze, the physical environment, and the knowledge/experience of the
hearer including that of similar communicative situations.
 
Cognitive view: In order to interpret intended meaning, the ability to integrate
relevant information is necessary. (RT details the process facilitating this.)

RT: Humans have an inborn inferential ability and a cognitive system geared
toward the processing of relevant information.

Humans develop the ability to draw implicated conclusions from this information
often necessary in communicative situations.

In communication, the speakers want to be understood and therefore make
utterances as easy as possible for the hearer to understand; this result in the
hearer being able to recover the intended meaning with minimum processing effort
and the most accessible interpretation is therefore the most relevant one.

.. contents::
   :depth: 2

Pragmatic processes
================================================================================

RT: Successful interpretation is facilitated by the processes of:

1. Reference assignment (inference)

2. Enrichment (inference)

3. Disambiguation (inference)

4. Implicature

What determines whether some or all of these processes are necessary for a
successful interpretation is the specificity of the utterance being interpreted
(akin to how literally they can be interpreted).

Utterances intended to be interpreted literally are relatively infrequent.
Utterances intended to be interpreted literally do not necessitate recovering
implicatures.

RT: (1)-(3) are argued to require inferences based on context. In addition, (4)
is necessary.

(1) Reference assignment

Reference assignment is the assignment of the relevant referent intended by the
speaker in a communicative exchange, such as the person or pronoun is used to
refer to.

Assignment is an imperative statement that binds a name to an expression in a
context.

Example: "x := 1" in Icon Example: "set! x 1" in Lisp Example: "let x = 1" in
Ocaml Example: "var x = 1;" in Javascript Example: "x = 1" in Python

An assignment usually has no referent or refers to None.

After an assignment, the name will be bound to the expression.

(2) Enrichment

Enrichment relates to the relevant semantic meaning based on the context. When a
hearer comprehends the meaning of words uttered in communication, enrichment of
the linguistic meaning with other aspect of meaning are needed to form a
coherent conceptualization.

Example: Inferring the meaning of words such as "enough" or "nothing" vary
according to the context in which they are used. In the context of going to a
party, the words in the phrase "nothing to wear" are enriched to mean "nothing
suitable or that I want to wear" rather than "nothing at all to wear". The
conceptual information about having "nothing to wear" to events such as parties
are access on hearing the utterance.

(3) Disambiguation

Disambiguation is the meaning derived from context via inference when the
expressed word has multiple meanings.

Example: "rich" can mean "wealthy", "fertile", or "calorific" depending on the
context

To constrain the possibilities of all the possible inferences from the
conceptual information overloading our interpretation process, an unconscious
logical operator guides access to conceptual information and a principle of
relevance constraints interpretation such that the first relevant interpretation
is taken as the one meant.

In utterances with ambiguous words and ambiguous context the wrong
interpretation can be reached as can and does happen in normal communication.

(4) Implicature

Implicatures are not inferred.

Implicatures are the result of a process of integrating previously generated
inferences with perceptual information and knowledge as is necessary for
interpreting the intended meaning.

This process facilitates the understanding of meaning that is not inferable from
the linguistic form.

Implicatures are the result of the combination of the inferences following from
the linguistic form of an utterance and relevant context information.

RT: The result of integrating or combining information (implicated premises)
leads to an implicate confusion (an implicature) The interpretation of intended
meaning reached via the process of implicature is contextually based.

Context refer the information available to the hearer at the time of the
interpretation.

    * perceptual information (facial expression, gesture, nodding) * intonation
      * words uttered * knowledge and experiences in memory

Implicature is necessary to understand the meaning of:

- Indirect answers to questions - Figurative language; metaphor, irony, lies,
  sarcasm - Vague expressions

Pragmatic complexity
================================================================================

The more undetermined a language expression, the more contextual information has
to be processed for comprehension.

Increased cognitive effort is incurred when implicatures are recovered.

RT allows predictions in terms of complexity of a language expression.

RT: Cognitive effort positively correlates with increased assumptions or
contextual effects derived from the context necessary for successful
understanding.

    *   A: "Do you know where the dog is" B: "The back gate's open"

        is more complex than:

        A: "Do you know where the dog is" B: "It's behind the shed"

Understanding a language expression that requires inferencing is less demanding
in terms of cognitive effort than language expressions that necessitate recovery
of implicatures.[1]

[1]: "Relevance Theory and Language Interpretation (2011), Ryder, Leinonen"

---

Relevance Theory and Language Interpretation (2011)
===================================================

Reports of children and adults with difficulties with how to use language in
communication.

Despite being grammatical and semantically well-formed, a speaker can speak out
of conversational context.

A listener may be unable to infer what a given utterance means in a particular 

History =======

Not until the 1980s that researchers began to investigate such difficulties.

First referred to as "semantic-pragmatic disorders". Then "pragmatic language
impairments" or "pragmatic impairment".


Early investigations of pragmatic difficulties were based on conversational
analysis approaches where conversations involving individuals with such
difficulties were

Difficult of using language in context.

- Turn taking - Coherence - Cohesive devices

Relevance Theory (RT) was being recognized as a theory of communication that
defined the processes necessary for language interpretation and went some way to
explaining the dynamic nature of the generation of influences (based on context)
and how linguistic and nonlinguistic meaning were interactively achieved.


## Pragmatic Processes 

# Pragmatic Language Comprehension

## Bridging Inferences and Right Hemisphere Brain Injury

## Sarcasm and Traumatic Brain Injury

## Mentalizing and Autism

# The Development of Pragmatic Language Comprehension

# Summary and Conclusions



.. [1] "Relevance Theory and Language Interpretation" 2011 [Ryder, Leinonen]
