

===============================================================================
Two-Year-Olds Learn Combinatorial Facts About Verbs by Listening
===============================================================================

Syntactic bootstrapping
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Syntactic bootstrapping is the phenomenon by which children use syntax as well
as observations of events to guide verb learning.

Syntactic bootstrapping works because the syntactic structures licensed by each
verb are systematically related to its meaning.

*   A transitive verb is a verb that requires one more object in a sentence.

    *   give

    *   hug

    Transitive verbs take two-nouns phrase arguments and describe
    conceptual-semantic predicates involving two core participants.

    *   "He tickled him" (tickler, ticklee)

*   An intransitive verb is a verb that has no direct object.

    *   age

    *   die

    *   sleep

    Intransitive verbs take one noun-phrase argument and described
    conceptual-semantic predicates involving a single core participants.

    *   "He laughed" (laugher)

In accord with these systematic relationships, children assign different
interpretations to novel verbs appearing in different sentence structures.

*   21-month-olds heard a made-up transitive or intransitive verb while viewing
    two simultaneously presented events.

    One event involved two participants and the other involved one participant.

    Children hearing a transitive verb looked reliably longer at the
    two-participant even than did those hearing an intransitive verb.

The syntactic difference between a transitive and intransitive sentence could
convey only aspects of verb meaning relevant to the number of participants
involved; relevant to the verb's semantic structure, but not to its semantic
content. Thus, the transitive structure informed children that the verb's
meaning involved two participants role; the verb's semantic content had to be
gathered from observing the events.

- Was observation of the events also necessary for children to identify the
  verb's semantic structure? OR: Is the syntactic structure in a which a novel
  verb occurs meaningful to children even without a concurrent scene from which
  to infer the verb's semantic content?

- Can children learn a new verb's combinational privileges--its transitivity and
  thus its number of participants roles--simply from listening to sentences in
  which the verb appears?

> In the experiments reported here, we investigated whether the syntactic
structure in which a novel verb occurs independently conveys information about
the verb's semantic structure to children, even when there is no concurrent
referential scene providing clues to the verb's semantic content.

Possibilities:

1. Simultaneous access to syntactic and referential contexts is necessary for
   syntax to guide verb learning.

2. Syntactic structures are independently meaningful, even without a concurrent
   scene providing information about a verb's semantic content.

    - Depends on key claim of syntactic-bootstrapping theory: syntactic
      structures themselves contribute meaning to sentences.

Prior research doesn't help because all involved providing simulatenous access
to syntactic and referential contexts.

Experiment:

- 2-year-olds were trained and test on a novel verb

1. In dialog phase, half the children encountered the verb in transitive
   sentences and half in intransitive sentences

2. Children view two simultaneously novel events

    - a two-participant event

    - a one-participant event

3. Verb was presented in a syntactically uninformative context

If children can learn combinational facts about a verb without knowing its
semantic content and can retrieve these facts when they hear the verb again,
then children who heard transitive dialogs would be expected to interpret the
verb as describing a two-participant relation and therefore to look longer at
the two participants than children who heard intransitive dialogs.

Experiment 1 shows that combinational information relevant to a verb's semantic
structure can be acquired without access to the verb's semantic content.

Experiment 2 replicates 1 and answers three additional questions:

1. Could the children in Experiment 1 have detected a superficial pattern during
   the practice trials and use that pattern to guide their responses in the test
   trial?

    - During the first practice trial, each sentence in the dialog phase
      mentioned one participant and each events in the event phases show one
      particiapnt. During the second practice trial, each dialog sentence
      mentioned two participants and each event showed two participants. This
      patterns might have led children who head transitive sentences in the
      test-trial dialog phase to prefer the two participant event

    - To eliminate this possibility, dialog phases were omitted for the practice
      trials, so children had no opportunity to learn that the dialogs were
      related to the subsequent events.

2. Could the dialog effect obtained in the test trial of Experiment 1 reflect
   sensitivity of the number of refer mentioned in the dialog phase, rather than
   learning about the novel verb?

    - Each sentence in the transitive dialog mentioned two participants, while
      each sentence in the intransitive dialog mentioned one.

    - To eliminate this possibility, a control condition in which no novel verb
      was presented during the test-trial event phases. If he dialog effect in
      Experiment 1 reflected learning about the novel verb, then it would
      disappear when no novel verb was presented during the test-trial event
      phases.

3. Presented immediately or on different day 

Did they have preference for two people instead of one?

Result:

- Children who heard transitive dialogs looked longer at the two-participant
  event and less at the one-participant event than did those who heard
  intransitive dialogs but only in the experimental condition.

- The same pattern held at each delay.

- What was the source of the syntax-semantic links that permitted the children
  to draw semantic conclusions about the verb on the basis of its transitivity?

- Could the children have learned to link a transitive verb with a
  two-participant event?

Provides compelling evidence for a key assumption of syntactic bootstrapping -
that sentence structures carry meaning indecently of the verbs in those
structures.

Questions for future research:

1. How did the children encode the dialog sentence?

2. Did the children engage in semantic processing while encoding the dialog
   sentences?

---

- 2 experiments

    - 2-year-olds observed dialogs in which interlocutor used a new verb in
      transitive or intransitive sentences

    - the children later heard the verb in isolation while watching a
      one-participant event and a two-participant event presented side by side

    - result: children who had heard transitive dialogs looked reliably longer
      at the two-participant event than did those who had heard intransitive
      dialog's

        - the effect persisted even when children were test on a different day

        - the effect disappeared when no novel verb accompanied the test events

    - conclusion: 2-year-olds gather useful combinational information about a
      novel verb simply from hearing it in sentences, and later retrieve that
      information to guide interpretation of the verb

---


Maybe having two people on a screen is more attractive.
