
================================================================================
The Stranger
================================================================================

:Author: Albert Camus

:Date: 1942

Part one
********************************************************************************

1
================================================================================

On a Thursday, Mersault receives a telegram from `The Home for Aged persons`_
informing him that his mother has died. He plans to take a bus there, keep
vigil, and be back before tomorrow evening. Mersault takes off from work for two
days.

Mersault takes the 2-o'clock bus after getting lunch and sleeps through it. He
meets with `the warden`_ who takes him over to `the mortuary`_ where Mersault
takes with `the doorkeeper`_ until nightfall when the vigil begins. Mersault
mostly sleeps through it though he wakes up sees the old people, who are mostly
silent. They all drink coffee and Mersault dozes off again.

.. figure:: http://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/4/4d/Aa_horsehearse_00.jpg/640px-Aa_horsehearse_00.jpg
   :height: 200
   :align: right

   A hearse.

Mersault cleans up in the shopkeeper's room. Besides the nurse on duty, only the
warden, Mersault, and one friend, Thomas Perez attend the funeral. It would take
45 minutes to walk to the church, which was in the village.

The procession takes place on a very hot day.

2
================================================================================

Mersault wakes up and realizes it is Saturday, and understand why his employer
was annoyed when he asked for two days off. He didn't realize at the time.

Mersault decides to go for a swim and catches a streetcar down to the harbor. He
swims with `Marie Cardona`_ and Mersault asks her to see a movie later. Mersault
puts on a black tie and Marie asks if he is mourning. He explains she died
yesterday and Marie "shrank away a little". They see the movie and then Marie
goes back with Mersault to his place, but shes leaves before he wakes to see her
aunt.

On Sunday, Mersault sleeps until 10 and stays in bed until noon, smoking
cigarettes, deciding not to lunch at Celeste's to avoid being questioned. "So I
fried some eggs and ate them off the pan. I did without bread as there wasn't
any left, and I couldn't be bother going down to buy it."

Mersault spends the afternoon on his balcony overlooking the main street in his
district smoking cigarettes and watching people until nighttime. Then he he goes
and buys bread and spaghetti and cooks it for dinner.

It occurs to him that nothing in his life had changed.

3
================================================================================

Monday

Mersault has a busy day at the office, catches a truck and gets lunches with
Emmanuel at Celeste's. He eats quickly, drinks coffee to finish up, and returns
back to his place for a short nap as he drank too much wine.

Before getting out of bed he smokes, and is late, having to run for the
streetcar.

.. figure:: http://www.amtuir.org/05_htu_tw_france_50/liste_alpha_tw_50/alger/images/fm_alger_1959_002.jpg

.. figure:: http://www.amtuir.org/05_htu_tw_france_50/liste_alpha_tw_50/alger/images/fm_alger_1959_003.jpg

.. figure:: http://www.amtuir.org/03_htu_cp/03_reseau_france_cp/alger_cp/images/cpa_000054.jpg

Mersault lives next to Salamano, a man who beats his dog.

Raymond invites Mersault into his home for dinner: some black pudding and wine.
Earlier that day Raymond had beat up the brother of a Moorish girl he had been
sleeping with. Raymond explains that this girl faulted him and he wants to take
revenge. He explains plans to write a letter and make her repent for what she'd
done, then go to bed with her, and when she was "properly primed up" he'd spit
in her face and throw her out of the room. Raymond says he's not up to writing
the kind of letter that was needed and that was where Mersault would help.
Mersault agrees to write the letter for Raymond and does so.

4
================================================================================

Mersault has a busy time in the office throughout the week.

Raymond dropped in once to say he sent off the letter.

Mersault went to the pictures twice with Emmanuel.

On Saturday, Marie came as arranged. "She had a very pretty red dress, with red
and white stripes, and leather sandals, and I couldn't take my eyes off her."
They took a bus to a beach some miles out of Algiers and then go back to
Mersault's night and spent the night.

The next day Mersault cooks lunch for himself and Marie. They hear a girl's
voice in Raymond's room, and some banging and screams. "It made one's blood run
cold." A crowd of people gather on the landing. A policeman arrives and chastens
Raymond and the girl leaves but otherwise nothing happens.

Marie doesn't eat and leaves at one and Mersault has a nap.

Toward three, Raymond knocks at the door. Raymond explained it all went
according to plan until the girl slapped him and he saw red, which is when he
started thrashing her. Mersault agrees to be Raymond's witness.

Raymond and Mersault go out to a cafe, drink and play billiards. Afterward
Raymond proposes going to a brothel, but Raymond refuses because "I didn't feel
like it".

Salamano's dog escaped him. Salamano is afraid the police will kill his dog.

5
================================================================================

Raymond calls Mersault and invites him to spend next Sunday at a seaside
bungalow just outside Algiers. Raymond has been shadowed all morning by Arabs.

Mersault's boss asked him if he wants to work in Paris. Mersault said he was
prepared to go, but

    He then asked if a "change of life" as he called it, didn't appeal to me,
    and I answered that one never changed his way of life; one life was as good
    as another, and my present one suited my quite well.
    
    At this he looked quite hurt, and told me that I always shilly-shallied, and
    that I lacked ambition -- a grave defect, to his mind, when one was in
    business.

    I returned to my work. I'd have preferred not to vex him, but I saw no
    reason for "changing my life". By and large it wasn't an unpleasant one. As
    a student I'd had plenty of ambition of the kind he meant. But, when I had
    to drop my studies, I very soon realized all that was pretty futile. (28)

Marie asks Mersault to marry her. Mersault agrees, but say he doesn't love her.
They go for a walk across the town by the main street. Mersault suggests getting
dinner at Celeste's but Marie was "booked up". Mersault went by himself to
Celeste's.

    I went by myself to Céleste’s. When I had just started my dinner an
    odd-looking little woman came in and asked if she might sit at my table. Of
    course she might. 

She sits at his table and they don't talk. Instead she marks a paper. Mersault
calls her "a little robot".

Mersault runs into old Salamano again. Salamano's dog is definitely lost; it
wasn't at the pound. Mersault invites Salamano into his home, but not much
happens.

6
================================================================================

Sunday morning. On the previous evening Mersault gave evidence for Raymond about
the girl being false to him.

Marie had to wake Mersault up. They skipped breakfast .

They knock on Raymond's door and decide to take the bus to the beach. While
waiting, Raymond points out Arabs to Mersault that stare at them. Marie didn't
understand and Mersault explained they have a grudge. The Arabs follow Raymond
and Mersault and Marie until they get in the bus.

They get to the beach and meet Masson, Raymond's friend, at his bungalow.
Mersault, for the first, considers the serious possibility of marrying Marie.

Marie, Masson, and Mersault go down to the beach for a swim as Masson's wife and
Raymond were disinclined to move. Mersault and Marie swim together. Mersault
falls asleep on the beach next to Marie.

Marie wakes Mersault up. It must be nearly lunchtime. They go for a quick swim
and then go back for lunch. They eat silently. It's only half-past 11.

Raymond, Masson, and Mersault go out for a walk while Marie cleans up and
Masson's wife naps. They go down to the water's edge and walk along it. Then
Mersault notices two Arab way down the beach. Mersault thinks they were tracked
by Marie's oilcloth bathing bag, but doesn't say anything.

Raymond goes up to then and one of the Arabs pull a knife, wounding Raymond's
arm and mouth. Masson knocks the other one down. Both sides back away from each
other and the Arabs run. Masson takes Raymond to a doctor and Mersault explains
to the women what has happened.

When Raymond gets back he decides to go for a walk. He asks to be left alone,
but Mersault decides to follow him. They see the Arabs again and Mersault asks
Raymond to give him his gun to keep him from doing anything rash. The Arabs
disappears again and Raymond and Mersault walk back.

When they reach the house Raymond feels too tired to see the women and decides
to go again for a walk. He runs into the Arab with the knife. They stare at each
other and Mersault takes a step forward and the Arab pulls the knife. Mersault
pulls the gun and shoots him, killing him instantly, and then shoots him four
more times.

Part 2
********************************************************************************

1
================================================================================

Mersault is questioned several times after the arrest, but they were all formal
examinations, as to his identity and so forth.

A lawyers comes to his cell. Mersault learns the police have been investigating
into his private life and that the police were informed that he had shown "great
callousness" at his mother's funeral. The lawyer asked Mersault about some way
of answering the charge of "callousness", but Mersault isn't cooperative.

In the afternoon, after the lawyer leaves, Mersault is taken to the examining
magistrate's office.  The magistrate tells Mersault that "owing to unforseen
circumstances" Mersault's lawyer was unable to be present. The magistrate
questions Mersault and asks him to recount the story of what happened. A clerk
in the room records everything that is said. Everything goes mechanically except
when the magistrate asks Mersault why he fired "five consecutive shots".
Mersault explains that there was ap ause between the first and the other four.
When asked why, Mersault is unable to answer. Without explanation, the
magistrate pulls out a crucifix and asks Mersault if he believes in God, to
which Mersault replies that he doesn't which frustrates the magistrate.

Mersault tells us he goes before the magistrate many times more over eleven
months, but on these with his lawyers, and only technicalities are discussed.
Mersault tells us that conversation becomes so cordial that he has the "absurd
impression of being 'one of the family'".

2
================================================================================

Mersault tells about life in prison.

Marie visits Mersault and keeps him company, but later sends a letter she will
not be visiting him any more.

Mersault misses woman and cigarettes, although he gets over cigarettes. At first
he thinks of himself as a free man and has urges to do things free men would do,
but over time he learns to think like a prisoner. Mersault passes the time
mostly sleeping and otherwise remembering things.

Mersault reads a story of a Czech man from a newspaper he finds stuck under his
mattress. He reads an article about a man who goes abroad to make money, comes
home under an alias to surprise his family, and is killed and looted by them
when they fail to recognize him.

Mersault learns that he has been six months in jail, though he loses track of
time.

3
================================================================================

Mersault's trial.

.. [*] Fernandel is a comedian.

4
================================================================================

Mersault is sentenced to death.

5
================================================================================

6
================================================================================

Elements
********************************************************************************

Setting
================================================================================

The Stranger takes place in Algiers, Algeria sometime before 1942 (when the book
was published).

.. figure:: http://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/a/af/OPERATION-TORCH-OVERVIEW.png
   :height: 300px

.. figure:: http://www.mikekemble.com/ww2/stork/stork26.jpg

.. figure:: http://www.mikekemble.com/ww2/stork/stork27.jpg

.. figure:: http://www.mikekemble.com/ww2/stork/stork29.jpg

.. figure:: http://www.mikekemble.com/ww2/stork/stork35.jpg

.. figure:: http://www.mikekemble.com/ww2/stork/stork44.jpg

Movies often come up. During the 1930s, some classics came out, such as
Frankenstein and King Kong.

.. figure:: http://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/en/8/88/Img_kingkong1.jpg

The Home for Aged Persons
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

At Marengo, some fifty miles (a two hour bus ride) from Algiers. The Home is a
little over a mile from the village, which Mersault walks.

Has a courtyard, a mortuary, and the warden's office.

Marengo is very hot and is close enough to the sea that one can taste salt in
the air. It is countryside.

The mortuary
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

The mortuary is "a bright spotlessly clean room, with whitewashed walls, and a
big skylight". "The furniture consists of some chairs and trestles. Two of the
latter stood open in the center of the room, and the coffin rested on them."

When Mersault arrives, the coffin is sealed, but can be easily opened.

Mersault's flat
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------


The Office
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

The office building overlooks the sea.

Raymond's room
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Raymond has one room, and a little kitchen without a window. He has a
pink-and-white plaster angel above his bed, and some photos of sporting
champions and naked girls pinned to the opposite wall. The room is dirty.

Raymond lights a paraffin lamp.

.. figure:: http://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/3/39/Tranby_house_49_gnangarra.jpg/180px-Tranby_house_49_gnangarra.jpg
   :align: right

   A paraffin lamp.

Major Characters
================================================================================

Mersault
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Mersault is the narrator of the story.

    Still, I had an idea he looked annoyed, and I said, without thinking:
    "Sorry, sir, but it's not my fault, you know." Afterwards it struck me I
    needn't have said that. I had no reason to excuse myself; it was up to him
    to express his sympathy and so forth. (4)

He lunches "as usual" at Celeste's restaurant.

Mersault is "very partial to *cafe au lait*" and is a smoker.

The worst hour of the day for Mersault is the morning when everyone is waking
up.

Mersault keeps an album of things in the papers that amuse him.

Mersault keeps chocolate.

Mersault is a young single man who works in business.

He lives alone in a flat that is too large for just himself. He moved the dining
table into his bedroom and it is the only room he uses. It "had all the
furniture I needed: a brass bedstead, a dressing table, some can chairs whose
seats had more or less caved in, a wardrobe with a tarnished mirror". Mersault
doesn't look after the rest of the flat since it's never used. It has a balcony
which overlooks the main street of his district.

Minor Characters
================================================================================

Mersault's Mother
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Mersault's mother lives in the Home for three years. She had no private means
and depended entirely on Mersault.

The warden claims she had good friends at the Home.

    When we lived together, Mother was always watching me, but we hardly ever
    talked. During her first few weeks at the Home she used to cry a good deal.
    But this was only because she hadn't settled down. After a month or two
    she'd have cried if she'd been told to leave the Home.

During the last year, Mersault seldom went to see her, reasoning that she had
settled down and it wouldn't have taken up his Sunday.

Her friends at the Home tell the Warden that she wishes to be buried with the
rites of the Church, which surprises Mersault, as "though not a professed
atheist, [she] had never given a thought to religion in her life" (5).

Ten inmates, presumably her friends, show up at her vigil. Nearly all the women
wore aprons with large stomaches, and them men were all skinny and carried
sticks. One of the women cries, because, as the doorkeeper explains, Mersault's
mother was her only friend.

Mersault's mother had an old friend named Thomas Perez. They were "inseparable"
and the inmates used to tease Perez about "having a fiancee". Perez did not
attend the vigil due to medical conditions.

Mersault doesn't know exactly how old she was.

Celeste
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Celeste has a restaurant in Algiers. He has a white mustaches, is fat, and wears
an apron.

Emmanuel
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Mersault borrow a black tie and mourning band from him, as he lost his uncle a
few months ago.

Emmanuel works in the Forwarding Department at the Office.

The Doorkeeper
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

The doorkeeper is "a pleasant-looking man, with blue eyes and ruddy cheeks" and
a white mustache. He is 64 and hails from Paris. The doorkeeper is an inmate at
the home, and has been there for five years. His wife too is at the home. He
sees himself as different from the rest of the inmates due to his authority,
despite them being no older.

The doorkeeper stays behind Mersault in the mortuary, making Mersault
uncomfortable.

The doorkeep offers *cafe au lait* to Mersault and smokes with him.

The Warden
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

The warden is "a very small man, with gray hair, and a Legion of Honor rosette
in his buttonhole" (4) with "watery blue eyes". He wears black and "pin-stripe"
trousers on the day of the funerals.

The nurse
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

The nurse is an Arab woman, wearing a blue smock and "a rather gaudy scarf
wound round her hair". Mersault learns she has a tumor from the doorkeeper. She
has "a bandage round her head, just below her eyes. It lay quite flat across the
bridge of her nose, and one saw hardly anything of her face except the stripe of
whiteness". Mersault thinks she knits.

Marie Cardona
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Marie was a typist at the office. She is young and visits the swimming pool.
Mersault liked her and he thinks she liked him too, but she left before anything
could come of it.

Marie repeatedly asks Mersault if he loves her. He says the question has no
importance, and that he supposed that he didn't.

    Marie came that evening and asked me if I'd marry her. I said I didn't mind;
    if she was keen on it, we'd get married.

    Then she asked me again if I loved her. I replied, much as before, that her
    question meant nothing or next to nothing -- but I supposed I didn't.

    "If that's how you feel," she said, "why marry me?"

    I explained that is had no importance really, but, if it would give her
    pleasure, we could get married right away. I pointed out that, anyhow, the
    suggestion came from her; as for me, I'd merely said, "Yes."

    Then she remarked marriage was a serious matter.

    To which I answered: "No."

    She kept silent after that, starting at me in a curious way. Then she asked:

    "Suppose another girl had asked you to marry her -- I ma girl you like in
    the same way as you like me -- would you have said 'Yes' to her, too?"

    "Naturally."

    Then she said she wondered if she really loved me or not. I, of course,
    couldn't enlighten her as to that. (29)

Salamano
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Raymond Sintes
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Raymond is "short and thick-set, has a nose like a boxer's, and always dresses
very sprucely".

Raymond is a pimp. He lives on the same floor as Mersault. He claims to be a
warehouseman. He isn't popular on the street.

Mersault sometimes invites Raymond into his home for short talks and listens to
him.

Masson
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Masson is Raymond's friend. He owns a small wooden bungalow near a beach just
outside Algiers. Masson is "tall, broad-shouldered, and this-set". He has a wife
who is "a plump, cheerful little woman who spoke with a Paris accent".

Masson fishes and cooks them to eat.

Mersault believes Masson and Raymond have been acquainted for some time and even
lived together for a while, as they talk of a lot of things and people he didn't
know when they go for a walk.

----

    I answered that, of recent years, I'd rather lost the habit of noting my
    feelings, and hardly knew what to answer. I could truthfully say I'd been
    quite fond of Mother-- but really that didn't mean much. All normal people,
    I added on afterthought, had more or less desired the death of those they
    loved, at some time or another.


    This was unthinkable, he said; all men believe in God, even those who reject
    Him. Of this he was absolutely sure; if ever he came to doubt it, his life
    would lose all meaning. (43)

    I was on the point of replying that was precisely because they *were*
    criminals. But then I realized that I, too, came under that description.
    Somehow it was an idea to which I never could get reconciled. (44)

    In the same wear tone [the magistrate] asked me a last question: Did I
    regret what I had done?a

    After thinking a bit, I said that what I felt was less regret than a kind of
    vexation-- I couldn't find a better word for it. But he didn't seem to
    understand. ... That was as far things went at that day's interview. (44)
