
.. include:: index

================================================================================
Protagoras
================================================================================
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Or the Sophists
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

:Author: Plato

:Translator: Benjamin Jowett

:Setting: 433, the house of Callias

**Protagoras** is one of Plato's early `Socratic dialogues`_. It describes a
story of a conversation between Protagoras, a Sophist, or teacher of virtue, and
Socrates. Socrates examines Protagoras regarding the nature of virtue, to learn
whether it can be thought, and leaves believing that all virtue is knowledge.

.. contents::

Summary
================================================================================

`Protagoras` begins with Socrates and a companion covering. Socrates's companion
asks Socrates where he has been, teasing him about having chasing Alcibiades.
Socrates explains that he has just gotten back from talking with Protagoras.
Socrates's companion asks Socrates to explain the story.

Socrates begins by explaining that he learned of Protagoras arrival in `Athens
<Classical Athens_>`_ when a young man named Hippocrates_ knocked at his house
very early in the morning. Hippocrates is evidently excited.

Socrates and Hippocrates decide to walk over `the court` and wait until daybreak
before visiting Protagoras at House of Callias. Socrates questions Hippocrates
about his desire to study with Protagoras. He asks Hippocrates what he expects
to learn from Protagoras; surely, from one learns from any artist their art, but
what art does Protagoras teach? Hippocrates replies that Protagoras is a
Sophist, and that he expects to learn to become a Sophist. Socrates asks
Hippocrates if he is ashamed of the thought of becoming a Sophist, which
Hippocrates admits. Socrates confirms that the teachings of Protagoras do
not make one a skilled artist, but are only a part of education (like grammar,
music, or physical health). More specifically, Hippocrates explains that
Protagoras teachs the art of "mak[ing] men eloquent", but Socrates presses
Hippocrates on what matter, given that artists should make anyone talk
eloquently about their art. Hippocrates admits he doesn't know.

Socrates warns Hippocrates that his decision to study with Protagoras is
impulsive and dangerous. Socrates warns that knowledge is "the food of soul",
and, like with food of the body, we must take care when seller praises what he
sells, since, with few exceptions, neither the seller nor the buyer may know
what is good or what is bad. Therefore, if someone has an understanding of what
is good and evil, one can safely buy knowledge, but otherwise then it is more
risky than buying food, since at least with those, one can inspect them again
before consuming.

Protagoras & What is sophistry?
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Socrates and Hippocrates travel to the house of Callias, where Protagoras is
staying. When they enter, they find Protagoras taking a walk in the cloister
followed by Callias, several other men that Socrates recognizes, though "the
greater part of them appeared to be foreigners, whom Protagoras had brought with
him out of the various cities visited by him in his journeys, he, like Orpheus_,
attracting them his voice, and they following." Nearby, Socrates spots Hippias
teaching physics and astronomy to men seated on benches and Prodicus teaching
from bed.

After looking around, Socrates and Hippocrates walk up to Protagoras and
Socrates explains that they are there because Hippocrates "aspires to political
eminence" and think that speaking with Protagoras would be most helpful. They
ask Protagoras whether he would like to speak in private or in public, to which
Protagoras replies with a long speech, dispelling the hatred against sophists
and stating his pride of openly being one, before answering that he would like
to speak in public. [1]_ Socrates and Callias suggest that the two hold a public
discussion, to which everyone agrees, and everyone assembles to listen.

Socrates restates his purpose of visiting, and explain that Hippocrates would
like to know "what will happen if he associates with you". Protagoras replies
that Hippocrates will be better everyday he stays with him, to which Socrates
essentially asks "better in what way?". Protagoras replies that he will learn
"prudence in affairs private as well as public; he will learn to order his own
house in the best manner, and he will be able to speak and act for the best in
the affairs of the state." Socrates restates it, with the approval of
Protagoras, as "the art of politics, and [the] promise to make men good
citizens."

*Note: I am going to the political art or skill as "virtue".*

Can virtue be taught?
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Socrates objects to the claim that virtue can be taught for two reasons:

.. contents::
   :local:
   :depth: 1

Why do the Athenians permit anyone to engage in politics?
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Socrates explains that the Athenians only let experts speak when a matter is one
that one can be an expert in; everyone else is forbidden. However, when a matter
is political in nature, everyone is permitted to speak. It seems then that
Athenians are under the impression that the art cannot be taught.

Protagoras replies with a myth. He explains that Prometheus and Epimetheus were
responsible for creating mortal creatures and by a certain date. In doing so,
they distributed to each defensive abilities, but neglected to give any to man.
As time ran out, Prometheus stole the mechanical arts (and fire with them) and
gave them to man. However, man did not have political wisdom, and though men
gathered in cities to avoid being destroyed by beasts, they destroyed each
other. Zeus, seeing this, granted them justice and reverence.

Further, if a man say that he is skillful in art in which he has no skill,
people think that he is mad. But equally when a man denies he has virtue which
he must have, people think he is mad. Thus the Athenians admit every man as a
counselor of virtue as they are of the opinion that every man partakes in it.

Further still, Protagoras argues that the men do not conceive political virtue
to be given by nature, but to be a thing which may be taught, since if they did
not, then they would not punish men, since they punish men only if they believe
the defendant was ignorant of a virtue which can be taught, assuming that
certain virtues can be taught, and that punishment teaches them. (By corollary,
if a man cannot be taught, then he is removed from society.)

Why can good men teach their sons skilled art, but not political art?
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Protagoras replies to this with an argument. He begins by pointing out that if
virtue is teachable, it surely would be hard to be believe that wise men did not
teach their sons virtue, teaching them mechanical arts instead, especially given
that failing to learn virtue is punishable by death. But, Protagoras argues,
wise men *do* teach their sons virtue, and they do so beginning from when a
child understands what is being said to him to the very end of his life. First
they do so as parents, pointing out right and wrong and correcting by
punishment, then by sending the child to teachers who teach him etiquette, then
by giving him books of great poets, and songs, and then by sending to the master
of gymnastic. And after the student is done with school, the state compels him
to learn the laws, which serve as an example of a moral life.

Protagoras then answers why the sons of good father often turn out ill. He
explains that to some degree, one's skill in virtue is due to natural
capacities; thus, the son of a good citizen might be a bad citizen and vice
versa.

Protagoras also makes the point that even the list virtuous of civil men is more
than virtuous than uncivilized man.

Protagoras explain that all men are teachers of virtue, each one according to
his ability, in the same way that all men are teacher of language. As such, it
is hard to find teachers of virtue, since most men are already well-educated.
Protagoras claims then, that as a teacher of virtue, he is only slightly better
than his peers, but they must be content with the result. (He explains then that
his pupils only pay what they think he is worth.)

One small difficulty
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

After Protagoras finishes his argument, Socrates explains he was quite charmed.
He praises Protagoras for his conduct in conversation and ability to both give
long speeches and answer briefly.

Then Socrates explains that he has one small difficulty: Is virtue one whole, of
which justice and temperance and holiness are parts, or are they only the names
of one and the same thing? At this Socrates begins a cross-examination.

Protagoras explains that they are unique parts, related to each other as the
parts of a face are related to the whole face, and separate, so that a man can
one but not the other. Furthermore, each has a distinct function. Socrates goes
on to show that justice and piety are nearly identical, and then does the same
with wisdom and temperance (by showing both to be the opposite of folly, and
getting Protagoras to agree everything has only one opposite). Protagoras
"assented, but with great reluctance".


Socrates threatens to leave
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

To conclude the arguments, Socrates attempts to show that justice and temperance
are identical. As he begins his questions, Protagoras, annoyed, evades one with
a speech. Socrates, asks Protagoras to cut his answer short, claiming (almost
certainly falsely) that he has a bad memory. Protagoras refuses, and Socrates
pins him on his reputation of being able to both speak at length or with speak
with brevity. Protagoras resists, under the impression that the dialogue is a
"battle of words". [14]) Socrates points out that as Protagoras is being
uncooperative and announces he should leave for another engagement. Callias
begs him to say, but Socrates replies that if Protagoras does not cooperate,
then he is simply unable as much as he would like to say.

Callias replies that each man may fairly speak his own way, but Alcibiades
refutes him. Hippias proposes that Socrates choose an umpire for the discussion,
but Socrates objects that no suitable umpire could be chosen. At last, Socrates
proposes that if Protagoras will not answer, then Protagoras should be allowed
to ask as many questions as he likes to Socrates, and afterward Socrates should
be allowed to ask as many question as he likes to Protagoras, to which everyone
agrees.

Virtue in the Poetry of Simonides
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Protagoras announces that he believes poetry to be the principal part of
education and proposes to transfer the question of virtue to its domain.

Protagoras refers to a work by Simonides that begins "Hardly on the one hand

Interlude
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Socrates grants that Protagoras may ask as he is inclined, but suggests no
longer discussing poems and returning to Socrates' original question, stating
that discussing poetry is vulgar, and that educated men amuse each with
orderly conversation. Protagoras tries to avoid answering, but decides to argue
after Alcibiades points out that Protagoras is refusing to answer.

Socrates remind Protagoras that he seeks truth, since Protagoras is wiser than
him.

The nature of virtue
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Socrates returns to the original question: "Are wisdom and temperance and courage
and justice and holiness five names of the same thing? Or has each of the names
a separate underlying essence and corresponding thing have a peculiar function,
no one of them being like any other of them?" Socrates reminds us that
Protagoras answered they were separate and distinct parts of virtue. Socrates
asks if Protagoras still holds that position, conceding that Protagoras may have
said what he did only in order to make a trail of Socrates.

Protagoras replies that "all these qualities are parts of virtue, and that four
of the five are to some extent similar, and that the fifth of them, which is
courage, is very different from the other four." Protagoras proves this by
claiming that a man can be ignorant, impious, intemperate, and unjust, and yet
still be courageous.

Socrates attempts to refute Protagoras on the by demonstrating courage is
wisdom, by showing that courage requires confidence, and confidence can be
taught, but Protagoras refutes Socrates argument by arguing that courage, unlike
confidence, is unteachable.

Socrates tries again by proving that one cannot be courageous and ignorant. He
begins by establishing that no man voluntarily pursues or accepts that which he
thinks to be evil, and that when man chooses evil, it due to ignorance (of
measuring pleasures and pains). Socrates then gets Protagoras to accept that
going to battle is honorable and good, and by the previous argument, no man
would choose not to go battle except through ignorance, hence, courage requires
wisdom.

Conclusion
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Socrates reminds that his purpose was to ascertain the nature and relation of
virtue, since the answer to whether virtue can be taught would also become
clear. Socrates explains that conclusion of the discussion is remarkable, for
Socrates began by saying that virtue cannot be taught and now attempts to prove
all things are knowledge, and Protagoras began by saying virtue can be taught,
attempts to prove it be anything rather than knowledge, and hence incapable of
being taught. Protagoras applauds Socrates, and they part ways.

Themes
================================================================================

Sophistry
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

The Sophists seem to have a mixed reputation. On one hand, they are known to be
eloquent speakers. [5]_ On the other, they are shamed.

The sophists are thought to be wise men. [4]_

Socrates believe the Sophists are sellers of knowledge, or paid tutors. [6]_

The doorkeeper does not want to open the door to Socrates and Hippocrates when
he mistakes them for Sophists. [7]_ I am unsure why.

Protagoras believe that the sophistry is an ancient art. [10]_ He claims that in
ancient times, those who practiced it disguised themselves under various names,
some under that of poets, as Homer, Hesiod, and Simonides, hierophants and
prophets, as Orpheus and Museaeus, musicians, as Agathocles, and some even under
the name of gymnastic masters.

Prodicus and Hippias are also Sophists.

Some sophists (Hippias at least) teach their pupils calculation, astronomy,
geometry, and music. Protagoras teaches prudence in private and public affairs,
how to order one's house, and the art of politics. [11]_

The sophists seem to have a reputation for making long speeches, even on trivial
manners. [12]_ This ends up being the case after Socrates begins damaging
Protagoras's reputation through a cross-examination, and Protagoras responds
with a speech, with nearly causes Socrates to leave. It is unclear however if
this is the nature of Protagoras, or, if he is simply doing this to appear the
better speaker. Further of note, Prodicus and Hippias make small speeches when
Socrates threatens to leave. Both speak eloquently, and Prodicus receives
applause and Hippias receives approval.

The danger of buying knowledge
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Opposition of Protagoras and Socrates
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------


Characters
================================================================================

Socrates
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Socrates maintains that there is a distinction between a discussion and a
competition of orations. As Alcibiades points out, orations seem to distract
from the point.

Hippocrates
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Hippocrates is a native Athenian, the son of Apollodorus and the brother of
Phason, is "of a great and prosperous house", and "is himself in natural ability
quite a match for anybody of his own age." Socrates believes that "he aspires to
political eminence."

Protagoras
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Protagoras has a great reputation. Hippocrates is very excited to see him that
he wishes to leave to see him before sunrise and is willing to pay him large
sums for his wisdom. [2]_

Protagoras is very old, claiming to be at least twenty years older than everyone
else in the room. [3]_ He has been a sophists for a long time. [3]_

Protagoras openly admits he is a Sophist.

Protagoras travels from city to city, persuading people to leave their family
and live with him, under the idea they will be improved by his conversation.
[8]_

Protagoras is the subject of many enmities and conspiracies. [9]_

Protagoras is portrayed to be a skilled speaker. He is able to both give great
speeches and speak in myth or argue. He also refutes several of Socrates
arguments.

Protagoras loses his temper at least once and, perhaps sensing that Socrates is
better at argument, resorts to oration to distract from the point and make
everyone forget the question.

Protagoras seems to view dialogues as a battle of words. [14]_ Protagoras
resists Socrates' compromise after he threatens to leave.

.. [*]
    A company like this of ours, and men such as we profess to be, do not
    require the help of another's voice, or of the poets whom you cannot
    interrogate about the meaning of what they are saying... and the point which
    is in dispute can never be decided. This sort of entertainment they decline,
    and prefer to talk with one another, and put one another to the proof in
    conversation.

.. [1] 
    Protagoras dispels the hatred by explaining that a man like himself who
    travels from city to city claiming that they will be improved by
    conversation arouses jealously, and that sophistry is an ancient art, but
    that due to its bad reputation, practitioners disguised themselves under
    other names, such as poets, prophets, gymnastic masters, and musicians.

.. [2]
    "He might take all that I have, and all that my friends have, if he
    pleased... All men praise him Socrates; he is reputed to be the most
    accomplished of speakers." - Hippocrates (10)

.. [3]
    "And I have been now many years in the profession -- for all my years when
    added up are many: there is no here present of whom I might not be the
    father" - Protagoras (14)

.. [4]
    "I take him to be on who knows wise things, he replied, as his name
    replies." - Hippocrates, refering to Protagoras (11)

.. [5]
    "What other answer could there be but that he presides over the art which
    makes men eloquent?" - Hippocrates (11)

.. [6]
    "Is not a Sophist, Hippocrates, one who deals whole or retail in the food of
    the soul? ... Surely, I said, knowledge is the food the soul." - Socrates
    (12-13)

.. [7]
    "And I think that the door-keeper, who was a eunuch, and who was probably
    annoyed at the great inroad of the Sophists, must have heard us talking. At
    any rate, when we knocked at the door, and he opened and saw us, he
    grumbled: They are Sophists -- he is not at home; and instantly gave the
    door a hearty bang with both his hands. Again we knocked, and he answered
    without opening: Did you not hear me say that he is not at home, fellows?
    But, my friend, I said, you need not be alarmed; for we are not Sophists,
    and we are not come to see Callias, but we want to see Protagoras; and I
    must request you to announce us. At last, after a good deal of difficulty,
    the man was persuaded to open the door." - Socrates (12)

.. [8]
    "For certainly a stranger finding his way into great cities, and persuading
    the flower or the youth in them to leave company of their kinsmen or any
    other acquaintances, old or young, and live with him, under the idea that
    they will be improved by his conversation, ought to be very cautious..." -
    Protagoras (13)

.. [9]
    "Great jealousies are aroused by his proceedings, and he is the subject of
    many enmities and conspiracies." - Protagoras (13)

.. [10]
    "Now the art of the Sophist is, as I believe, of great antiquity; but in
    ancient times those who practised it, fearing this odium, veiled and
    disguised themselves under various names, some under that of poets, as
    Homer, Hesiod, and Simonides, some, of hierophants and prophets, as Orpheus
    and Musaeus, and some, as I observe, even under the name of
    gymnastic-masters, like Iccus of Tarentum, or the more recently celebrated
    Herodicus, now of Selymbria and formerly of Megara, who is a first-rate
    Sophist. Your own Agathocles pretended to be a musician, but was really an
    eminent Sophist; also Pythocleides the Cean; and there were many others; and
    all of them, as I was saying, adopted these arts as veils or disguises
    because they were afraid of the odium which they would incur" - Protagoras
    (13)

.. [11]
    "If Hippocrates comes to me he will not experience the sort of drudgery with
    which other Sophists are in the habit of insulting their pupils; who, when
    they have just escaped from the arts, are taken and driven back into them by
    these teachers, and made to learn calculation, and astronomy, and geometry,
    and music (he gave a look at Hippias as he said this); but if he comes to
    me, he will learn that which he comes to learn. And this is prudence in
    affairs private as well as public; he will learn to order his own house in
    the best manner, and he will be able to speak and act for the best in the
    affairs of the state." - Protagoras (14)

.. [12]
    "If a man were to go and consult Pericles or any of our great speakers about
    these matters, he might perhaps hear as fine a discourse; but then when one
    has a question to ask of any of them, like books, they can neither answer
    nor ask; and if any one challenges the least particular of their speech,
    they go ringing on in a long harangue, like brazen pots, which when they are
    struck continue to sound unless some one puts his hand upon them; whereas
    our friend Protagoras can not only make a good speech, as he has already
    shown, but when he is asked a question he can answer briefly; and when he
    asks he will wait and hear the answer; and this is a very rare gift. " -
    Socrates (19)

.. [13]
    "I thought that Protagoras was getting ruffled and excited; he seemed to be
    setting himself in an attitude of war." - Socrates (24)

.. [14]
    "Socrates, he replied, many a battle of words have I fought, and if I had I
    had followed the method of disputation which my adversaries desired, as you
    want me to do, I should have been no better than another, and the name of
    Protagoras would have been nowhere." - Protagoras (24)

.. [15]
    "An in like manner, if you want to hear me and Protagoras discoursing, you
    must ask him to shorten his answers, and keep to the point, as he did at
    first; if not, how can there be any discussion? For discussion is one thing,
    and making an oration is quite another, in my humble opinion." - Socrates
    (25)

.. [16]
    "If [Protagoras] claims a superiority in argument as well, let him ask and
    answer—not, when a question is asked, slipping away from the point, and
    instead of answering, making a speech at such length that most of his
    hearers forget the question at issue (not that Socrates is likely to
    forget—I will be bound for that, although he may pretend in fun that he has
    a bad memory)." - Alcibiades (25)

.. [17]
    "I am of the opinion, Socrates, he said, that skill in poetry is the
    principal part of education; and this I conceive to be the power of knowing
    what compositions of the poets are correct, and what are not, and how they
    are to be distinguished, and of explaining when asked the reason of the
    difference." - Protagoras (26)

----

Fear is the expectation of evil. A man will not pursue what he fears when is not
compelled.

Socrates now attacks Protagoras's statement that of the five virtues were nearly
akin, but the that the fifth, courage, differently greatly from the others.
Protagoras proved this by stating some of the most unvirtuous men are among the
courageous. And the brave mean the confident.

The courageous are not ready to go against the same dangers as the cowards; The
cowards go where there is safety, and the courageous where there is danger. The
courages are ready to go against dangers believing them not to be dangers. No
one goes to meet what he thinks to be dangers, since the want of self-control,
which makes men rush into dangers, has been shown to be ignorance. Any yet the
courageous man the coward alike go to meet that about which they are confident;
so that in this point of view the cowardly and the courageous go to meet the
same things.

Going to battle is honorable. And honorable has already been admitted to be
good. Cowards are unwilling to go go to battle. What is good and honorable is
also pleasant.  The cowards do not knowingly refuse to go the pleasanter. The
courageous man goes to meet the pleasanter. And the courageous man has no base
fear or base confidence; and since not base, honorable, and since honorable,
good. The fear and confidence of the coward are base. Base fears confidences
originate in ignorance. Cowards act with a motive of of cowardice. Cowards are
such through their ignorance of dangers. And because of that ignorance they are
coward. Then, the ignorance of what is and is not is cowardice. Courage is the
opposite of cowardice. Then the wisdom which knows what are and are not dangers
is opposed to the ignorance of them.

.. todo: Plato credits him with having invented the role of the professional
.. sophist. - Wikipedia
