
================================================================================
Relational Model
================================================================================

A relational model is ....

History
================================================================================

Qualitative differences among relationship types, and the emotional costs of
uncertainty regarding which ones applies,have been explored in cross-cultural
detail by Fiske.

Models
================================================================================

Humans assign every relationship and resource to one of four discrete relational
models which govern their interactions:

1. Communal sharing

2. Authority ranking

3. Equality matching

4. Marketing pricing

Each relational model is defined by a distinct calculations for the
apportionment of resources.

Each relational model has a distinct evolutionary basis.

Assignments can vary with the culture.

Assignments can be renegotiated dynamically by individual dyads.

Withing a given culture, relational models are not assigned to dyads across the
board but may be differentiated according to the resource.

    * A professor and graduate student may implement communal sharing in most
      social resources (e.g. priority in line in a cafeteria) but authority
      ranking in professional resources (e.g. use of lab equipment).  * Platonic
      opposite-sex friend may obey communal sharing from most resources other
      than sexuality.

People care intensely about the prescriptions of relational models because these
models are the means by which humans agree on how to distribute the resources
(material, emotional, and sexual) needed by all members of their communities for
survival and reproduction.

Communal sharing ----------------

Arises from kin selection.

Governs relationships among family members, spouses, and close friends.

Partners bond through signals of physical union, common meals and rituals

Free sharing of resources with minimal regard for equity balances.

Authority ranking -----------------

Govern individuals at different levels of a dominance hiearychy Signalized by
signs of size, strength, and priority Empowers a dominant individual to seize
resources at will

Equality matching -----------------

Arises from reciprocal altruism and other ways of appropriating resources on an
equitable basis.

Governs relationships among acquaintances, neighbors, and trading partners

Defined by more or less explicit mechanism of ensuring equity

May be negotiated by verbal contracts

Market pricing --------------

Applies to buyers, sellers, lenders, and middleman Not a universal feature of
human societies Does not come naturally to participants in a complex modern
economy People tend to regress toward equality matchings We do not distinguish
between 3 and 4

Governance ==========

When two people perceive that one of these relational model applies to their
interaction in a given context, each tacitly accept the designated kinds of
transactions as socially legitimate.

Violations ==========

Transactions appropriate to other models elicit feeling of awkwardness, or if
deliberate and sustained, moralistic anger.

    * A husband can pick hors d'oeuvre from his wife's plate or vice-versa
      (communal sharing).  * An employee cannot snatch a hors d'oeuvre from the
      plate of his supervisor (violation of authority ranking).

Accidental Violation --------------------

When one party breaches the relational model currently in force, the result is
one of the aversive "self-conscious" emotions which pain speakers in the present
and motivate them to avoid similar affronts in the future.

    * Awkwardness * Embarrassment * Shame

Displays of shame and awkwardness appear only in the presence of others.
Displays of shame and awkwardness tend to be particularly intense in the
presence of the wronged individual.

Involuntary signs of shame may serve as honest signals of the speaker's remorse
and concomitant resolve to refrain in the future from similar offenses.

    * blushes * restless eye movements * stammering * confusion

Deliberate Violation --------------------

When the violation of a relational model is deliberate and protected, the
actions are not just embarrassing but are stigmatized by taboo and may be
formally criminalized.

This may happen when a person proposes to allot resources that are normally
governed by communal sharing or authority ranking to the rules of equality
matching or marketing pricing instead.

    * Prostitution * Extortion * The solicitation of a quid pro quo sexual favor
      * The sale of votes * The sale of organs * The sale of adoptions rights *
        Buying one's way out of jury duty * Buying one's way out of military
        duty


---

Relationship Negotiation
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

    * Consider bribing a head waiter to be seated immediately despite having no
      reservation.  - "is there any to shorten my wait?" " I wil give you $20 if
      you seat me immediately" * Consider propositioning a woman after dinner.
      The common expectation is that a man would use an indirect come-on rather
      than d riect one.  "Would you like to come up for a cup of coffee?" "Would
      you like to come up and have sex?"

To apply the model of the strategic speaker to cases where tangible costs are
absent, we must identify the intangible costs that define the requisite payoff
matrix.

- One possibility is the implicit currency of social equity invoked by Clark.  -
  Actions lead to an equity imbalane between speaker and hearer promtpt them to
  redress it with compensating actions or verbal gesutre.  - Problem is that a
  bribe or a sexual favor offers the opportunity for perfect equity if it it
  mutually agreed upon, yet merely broaching such a possiblity can lead to
  enormous emotional tension.  - Emotional tensions is not just a matter of
  equity imbalances.  - Not all relationships are governed by equity.  -
  Relationships that are may different in which resources may be legitimately
  entered into the balance sheet.  - The very process by which two people choose
  to enter an equity relationship gives rise to the relevant emotional costs.

