
.. include:: index

================================================================================
Relevance
================================================================================

In law, according to Rule 401 of the `Federal Rules`, evidence is relevant if
(a) it has any tendency to make a fact more or less probable than it would be
without the evidence; and (b) the fact is of consequence in determining the
action. The relevancy concept saves time.

For instance, consider a patent infringement suit where the plaintiff claims
that the defendant has begun to sell a pen with an ink supply system that copies
a system patented by the plaintiff more closely than patent law allows. It would
be irrelevant to introduce testimony that the defendant company recently moved
its headquarters from one city to another (due to *a*), and equally irrelevant
to introduce testimony that the defendant's president bought one of the
plaintiff company's pens, wrote with it, and said that he would like to invent a
pen that worked as well (due to *b*-- the juror may fail to distinguish between
a desire to imitate a product and a plan to misuse patented aspects of a
design).

Unfair prejudice
================================================================================

Evidence is subject to exclusion if the risk of unfair prejudice substantially
outweighs its probative value.

If evidence will help an opponent, parties try not to introduce it. In this
sense, all evidence a party introduces is intended to prejudice the opponent,
since it is meant to help the proponent's side of the case and hurt the
opponent. It is only when a fact finder might react to aspects of evidence *in a
way that is not supposed to be part of the evaluative process* that the reaction
is considered *unfair* prejudice.

For instance, if the victim in an assault case could introduce testimony that
the defendant ran toward him shouting "Get over here! I'm going to break your
arm!".

However, if someone testified that the defendant said to the alleged victim,
"I'm going to break your arm because I belong to a cult that worships violence"
jurors might develop a negative impression about the defendant from learning
about the defendant's worship of violence and might the relate the statement
about religion specifically to the alleged crime. These impressions would be an
example of unfair prejudice since they are unrelated to the probative value the
religion information has with respect to the charged crime.

To determine whether the risk of unfair prejudice substantially outweighs the
probative value of evidence, a judge is required to do some kind of weighing.

Limited Admissibility
================================================================================

Sometimes an item of evidence is relevant to one issue in a case and has no
relationship at all to another issue. In that circumstance, the evidence
passes the relevancy hurdle. The situation is more complicated when a single
item of evidence is relevant to one issue and is a type of evidence forbidden to
be considered with respect to another issue.

There are two possible resolutions. The evidence could either not be admitted,
or it can be admitted with a cautionary "limiting" instruction, directing jurors
to consider the information only with respect to the topic for which it is
legitimately admitted.

Conditional Relevance
================================================================================

Sometimes an item of evidence by itself will have no relevance to any issue in a
trial, but would be relevant if the trier of fact also has some other
information.

    Rule 104(b): When the relevance of evidence depends on whether a fact
    exists, proof must be introduced sufficient to support a finding that the
    fact does exist. The court may admit the proposed evidence on the condition
    that the proof be introduced later.

For example, it would be relevant to show that the defendant owned a red hat
conditional on the fact that a witness had seen the murderer run from the
scene wearing a red hat.
