
.. include:: index

================================================================================
Syntax
================================================================================

In linguistics_, **syntax** is the study of the principles and processes by
which sentences_ are constructed in particular languages_. (Arrangement of
words)

.. contents::

History
================================================================================

Standard Theory
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

The Standard Theory (1957) corresponds to the original model of generative
grammar laid out in Chomsky's 'Aspects of the theory of syntax'.

Linguists working in this view see a sentence as not merely a string of words,
but rather a derivation tree. Phrase structure trees are not sufficient though,
and require transformational grammar.

Deep Structure & Surface Structure
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

The deep structure of a linguist expression is a theoretical construct that
represents the core semantics relations of a sentence. The deep structure is
mapped onto to the surface structure via transformations.

Transformations had been proposed prior to the development of deep structure as
a means of increasing the mathematical and descriptive power of context-free
grammars.

Chomsky's advisor, Zellig Harris, took transformations to be relations between
sentences.

Deep structures can unify similar structures that have similar meanings. For
example, the sentences "Pat loves Chris" and "Chris is loved by Pat" means
roughly the same thing and use similar words. To account for this similarity,
some linguists (e.g. Chomsky) have to tried to account for this similarity by
posting that these two sentences are distinct surface forms that derive from a
common 'deep structure'.

Chomsky developed a formal theory of grammar where transformations manipulated
not only the surface strings, but the parse tree associated to them.

Chomsky noted that by dividing deep structures from surfaces structures, one
could understand "slip of the tongue" moments (when someone say something one
did not instend) as instances where deep structures do not translate into
intended surface structure.

The deep structure concept caught on in unrelated fields (e.g architecture,
music, politics) to express similar concepts.

---

Chomsky believes there are considerable similarities between language's deep
structures. Chomsky has argued that many of the properties of a generative
grammar arise from an "innate" universal grammar.
