
.. include:: index

================================================================================
The Myth of Sisyphus
================================================================================
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
And Other Essays
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

:Author: Albert Camus

:Date: 1942

From the preface:

    `The Myth of Sisyphus` attempts to resolve the problem of suicide, as `The
    Rebel` attempts to resolve that of murder... The fundamental subject of `The
    Myth of Sisyphus` is this: it is legitimate and necessary to wonder whether
    life has a meaning; therefore is is legitimate to meet the problem of
    suicide face to face. The answer, underlying and appearing through the
    paradoxes which over it, is this: even if one does not believe in God,
    suicide is not legitimate... This book declares that even within the limits
    of nihilism it is possible to find the means to proceed beyond nihilism...
    Although `The Myth of Sisyphus` poses mortal problem, it sums itself up for
    me as a lucid invitation to live and to create in the very midst of the
    desert.

.. contents::

Background
********************************************************************************

`The Myth of Sisyphus` was written in 1940 amid the French and European
disaster.

`The Myth of Sisyphus` is dedicated to `Pascal Pia`, a French writer whom Camus
had worked with when he was a journalist at the `Alger republicain` and later
also at `Combat`.

Summary
********************************************************************************

An Absurd Reasoning
================================================================================

    There is but one truly serious philosophical problem, and that is suicide.
    Judging whether life is or is not worth living is the fundamental question
    of philosophy. All the rest -- whether or not the world has three
    dimensions, whether the mind has nine or twelve categories -- comes
    afterwards.

Absurdity and Suicide
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

If one question is more urgent than another based on the actions it entails, and
if the answer to the meaning of life entails whether to live or to die, then
knowing where there is a reason for life is the most urgent of questions.

Why do men commit suicide? (Camus think the most obvious reasons are unlikely if
plausible, and that suicide is rarely committed rationally.) It is, of course,
impossible to ever know what true reason was. But we can try to deduce from the
consequences what it implies. If a man committed suicide, he must have
recognized that life was not worth living.

We assume that there is some relationship between absurdity, the feeling of
estrangement from one's life, and suicide. The subject of this essay is exactly
that, and the degree to which suicide is a solution to the absurd.

Is it legitimate to wonder if absurdity determines suicide. Without even
considering the meaning of the terms, the solution seems to be either yes or no.
But we can give many examples of men who think there is no meaning of life who
do not kill themselves and many examples of men who think there is a meaning of
life but kill themselves. Given such examples, must we conclude that there is no
relationship between the opinion has about life and suicide? It doesn't seem
that we can, since if we also believe that body has just as much say as the
mind, then it could be as simple as we resist suicide through habit, what Camus
calls *eluding*.

Camus suggests we simply ignore all the contradictions and go straight to the
real problem. Certainly, one commits suicide because life is not worth living (a
truism). But is there a way to logically reason from absurdity to suicide?

Absurd Walls
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Absurdity is hard to perceive clearly. Camus makes an analogy. Knowing a man
truly may be impossible, but through repeated interaction we get to know him
practically. A man defines himself by his actions as well as by his sincere
impulses. It seems to suggest that there are deep motives for our actions which
are inaccessible to us, except through the acts they imply. Camus thinks this
method of knowing a man might give us a way to know absurdity. We assume all
true knowledge is impossible; everything is appearance or feeling.

Camus proceeds to give descriptions of the absurd in various forms, just
restating what is common to all of us.

Absurdity is like inspiration; both seem to appear spontaneously. The habit of
living seems to be easy to follow most of the time, and then spontaneously one
asks "why" and everything changes. Weariness awakens consciousness, and provokes
either a return to habit or definitely awakens a man, until he kills himself or
recovers. Camus argues that though weariness seems to be sickening, it is good,
since nothing is worth anything except through consciousness, and everything
begins with consciousness.

During most of normal life, we look forward to the future and time is our
friend. Yet when absurdity strikes, we recognize that our lives are finite, and
that time is our enemy.

During moments of absurdity, the beauty of the world becomes alienating. The
denseness and the strangeness of the world is the absurd.

We also become estranged from other men.

Camus reminds us he is less interested in the science of the absurd and more
understanding its consequences.

----

Next Camus gives us a description of the absurd on the plane of intelligence.

    The mind's first step is to distinguish what is true from what is false.
    However, as soon as though reflects on itself, what it first discovers is a
    contradiction.

We cannot define truth. Camus assumes that the mind's deepest desire is to
understand reality truly, but that we cannot get true knowledge.

Camus reminds us that though these things are obvious, what is interesting is
their conclusions.

    It is essential to consider as a constant point of reference in this essay
    the regular hiatus between what we fancy we know and what we really know,
    practical assent and simulated ignorance which allows us to live with ideas
    which, if we truly put them to the test, ought to upset our whole life.

Camus declares that the only thing we exist and that the world exists. One
cannot define one's self. "Aspects cannot be added up... Forever I shall be a
stranger to myself."

    Socrates' "Know thyself" has a much value as the "Be virtuous" of our
    confessionals. They reveal a nostalgia at the same as an ignorance. They are
    sterile exercises on great subjects. They are legitimate only in so far as
    they are approximate.

Science, for all of its explanatory power, is still only theory (which is
essentially, just a metaphor), and explains only aspects.

Camus rescinds that the world is absurd (though he maintains that is
unreasonable) and instead says the absurd is the confrontation of man's desire
to understand and the unreasonableness of the world. The absurd depends on man
as much as one the world, as it is what links them together.

.. (21) is unclear after this

----

We continue to put aside whether the absurd dictate suicide. Instead, we
"recognize rather those themes and those impulses born of the desert. It will
suffice to enumerate them. They, too, are know to all today."

There have always been men to defend the right of the irrational. (When Camus
say irrational here, he means that they reject rationalism, who hold that there
must be some truth in the universe which can be discovered. Among them are
scientists.) In particular, in modern times the attack on reason has been
active. Camus assumes these thought to "be known and lived". We are concerned
here with nothing their agreement.

    Heidegger considers the human condition coldly... The only reality is
    "anxiety" in the whole chain of beings. To the man lost in the world and its
    diversions this anxiety is a brief, fleeting fear. But if that fear becomes
    conscious of itself, it becomes anguish, the perceptual climate of the lucid
    man "in whom existence is concentrated"... This is to conclude at the end of
    his analyses that "the world can no longer offer anything to the man filled
    with anguish." This anxiety seems to him so much more important than all the
    categories in the world that he thinks and talks only of it... He enumerates
    its aspects: boredom when the ordinary man strives to quash it in him and
    benumb it; terror when the mind contemplates death. He too does not separate
    consciousness from the absurd... For him, too, one must not sleep, ut must
    keep alert until the consummation.

.. It's not clear what book of Heidgger's Camus is referring to specifically
.. here.

Camus reviews Jasper.

Camus reviews Chestov.

Camus reviews Kierkegaard.

Camus reviews Husserl and the phenomenologists.

    I want everything explained to me or nothing. And the reason is impotent
    when it hears this cry from the heart... But these men vie with another in
    proclaiming that nothing is clear, all is chaos, that all man has is his
    lucidity and his definite knowledge of the walls surrounding him.

Each of this philosophers agree with each other.

.. I may have missed something at the end here.

Philosophical Suicide
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

The feeling of the absurd is not the notion of the absurd; it only lays the
foundation for it. The feeling of the absurd is alive; it must continue living
or die.

The problem of suicide is finding out how, when people are experiencing the
absurd, how some people get away when and why some people stay.

A detour. Up to now we've managed to describe the absurd. "One can, however,
wonder how much is clear in that notion, and by direct analysis try to discover
its meaning on the one hand, on the other, the consequences it involves."

Absurdity arises from comparison of two contradictory terms. Thus, the absurd is
a relation, rather than an attribute of any object.

The absurd condition is the comparison of man's desire for the world to be
rational, and it being irrational.

    The immediate consequence is also a rule of method... If I judge a thing is
    true, I must preserve it. If I attempt to solve a problem, at least I must
    not by that very solution conjure away one of the terms of the problem...
    The only condition of my inquiry is to preserve the [absurd], consequently
    to respect what I consider essential in it.

Some distinguishing features:

- It cannot be divided. To destroy one of the terms is to destroy the whole.

    There can be no absurd outside the human mind. Thus, like everything else,
    the absurd ends with death. But there can be no absurd outside this world
    either. And it is by this elementary criterion that I judge the notion of
    the absurd to be essential and consider that it can stand as the first of my
    truths.

    Camus, Albert (2012-10-31). The Myth of Sisyphus: And Other Essays (Vintage
    International) (pp. 30-31). Knopf Doubleday Publishing Group. Kindle
    Edition. 

    Carrying this absurd logic to its conclusion, I must admit that the struggle
    implies a total absence of hope (which has noting to do with despair), a
    continual rejection (which must not be confused with renunciation), and a
    conscious dissatisfaction (which must not be compared to immature unrest)...
    The absurd has meaning only in so far as it is not agreed to.

----

"There exists an obvious fact that seems utterly moral: namely, that a man is
always prey to his truths. Once he has admitted them, he cannot free himself
from them... A man who has become conscious of the absurd is forever bound to
it. A man devoid of hope and conscious of being so has ceased to belong to the
future."

It is just as natural that he should strive to escape the universe of which he
is the creator.

It is remarkable that all existential philosophies suggest escape. Starting from
the absurd, and abandoning reasoning, they somehow find hope in the absurd, in
an almost religious or mystic fashion. As examples, Camus analyses a few themes
of Jasper, Chestov and Kierkegaard. Camus points out that nothing logically
leads to the conclusion, and so calls it a leap.

.. skipping chestov

----

Camus calls this existential attitude philosophical suicide (though this does
not imply a judgment). It is a convenient way of indicating the movement by
which a thought negates itself and tends to transcend itself in its very
negation.

For the existentials, negation is their God. To be precise, that god is
maintained only through the negation of human reason.

Like suicides, gods change with men. There are many ways of leaping, the
essential being to leap.

.. So, if I understand this right, Camus is making the point that many
.. philosophers negate something, either their need to be rational and adopting
.. faith in God, or that the world is irrational and just becoming a rationalist.

    Those redeeming negations, those ultimate contradictions which negate the
    obstacle that has not yet been leaped over, may spring just as well (this is
    the paradox at which this reasoning aims) from a certain religious
    inspiration as from the rational order.

    Camus, Albert (2012-10-31). The Myth of Sisyphus: And Other Essays (Vintage
    International) (p. 42). Knopf Doubleday Publishing Group. Kindle Edition.

.. I think Camus means that we make assumptions to simplify the world and reason
.. about it.

    It must be repeated that the reasoning developed in this essay leaves out
    altogether the most widespread spiritual attitude of our enlightened age:
    the one, based on the principle that all is reason, which aims to explain
    the world. That is even legitimate, but does not concern the reasoning we
    are following out here. In fact, our aim is to shed light upon the step
    taken by the mind when, starting from a philosophy of the world’s lack of
    meaning, it ends up by finding a meaning and depth in it.

    Camus, Albert (2012-10-31). The Myth of Sisyphus: And Other Essays (Vintage
    International) (p. 42). Knopf Doubleday Publishing Group. Kindle Edition. 

    But the most paradoxical and most significant is certainly the one that
    attributes rational reasons to a world it originally imagined as devoid of
    any guiding principle.

    Camus, Albert (2012-10-31). The Myth of Sisyphus: And Other Essays (Vintage
    International) (p. 42). Knopf Doubleday Publishing Group. Kindle Edition. 

Camus examines Husserl and the phenomenologists. They have a concept of
"intention" that refers to the idea of consciousness focusing on an object, but
not explaining it. Methods of thought always assume two aspects: one
psychological and the other metaphysical. Camus criticizes it, I think because
after denying that the world is reasonable, he introduces the notion of physical
laws.

----

    The abstract philosopher and the religious philosopher start out from the
    same disorder and support each other in the same anxiety. But the essential
    is to explain. Nostalgia is stronger here than knowledge.


    Reason... provides modern anguish the means of calming itself in the
    familiar setting of the eternal. The absurd mind has less luck. For it the
    world is neither so rational nor so irrational. It is unreasonable and only
    that.

    Camus, Albert (2012-10-31). The Myth of Sisyphus: And Other Essays (Vintage
    International) (pp. 48-49). Knopf Doubleday Publishing Group. Kindle
    Edition. 

    The theme of the irrational, as it is conceived by the existentials, is
    reason becoming confused and escaping by negating itself. The absurd is
    lucid reason noting its limits.

    Camus, Albert (2012-10-31). The Myth of Sisyphus: And Other Essays (Vintage
    International) (p. 49). Knopf Doubleday Publishing Group. Kindle Edition. 

[Wanting to know] is the only sin of which the absurd can feel that it
constitutes both his guilt and his innocence.

.. I think here Camus is distancing himself from the existentials, who (at least
.. of the ones he considers) all advise escape.

.. Camus calls the need to understand the world many names, including "nostalgia
.. for unity".


Absurd Freedom
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Man does not know whether the world has a meaning that transcends it and cannot.
He only knows that the he has a desire for the absolute and that it is
impossible to reduce this world to a rational and reasonable principle.

A fake meaning cannot meaning anything to man. Man can only understand in human
terms.

Non-conscious being do not have this problem, since they are a part of the
world and do not need to understand it.

The basis of the absurd is a awareness of it. Therefore, to preserve it, one
must remain ever alert.

    Let us insist again on the method: it is a matter of persisting. At a
    certain point on his path he absurd man is tempted. History is not lacking
    either religions or prophets, even without gods. He is asked to leap... He
    wants to find, out if it is possible to live *without appeal*.

By living without appeal, I think he means to a higher being.

.. Section is vague.

----

"Now I can broach the notion of suicide. It has already been felt what solution
might be given."

    It was previously a question of finding out whether or not life had to have
    a meaning to be lived. It now becomes clear, on the contrary, that it will
    be lived all the better if it has no meaning. Living an experience, a
    particular fate, is accepting it fully. Now, no one will live this fate,
    knowing it to be absurd, unless he does everything to keep before him that
    absurd brought to light by consciousness. Negating one of the terms of the
    opposition on which he lives amounts to escaping it. To abolish conscious
    revolt is to elude the problem. The theme of permanent revolution is thus
    carried into individual experience. Living is keeping the absurd alive.
    Keeping it alive is, above all, contemplating it... It is a constant
    confrontation between man and his own obscurity. It is an insistence upon an
    impossible transparency... The revolt is the certainty of a crushing fate,
    without the resignation that ought to accompany it.

    This is where it is seen to what a degree absurd experience is remote from
    suicide. It may be thought that suicide follows revolt -- but wrongly. For
    it does not represent the logical outcome of revolt. It is just the contrary
    by the consent it presupposes. Suicide, like the leap, is acceptance at its
    extreme... The contrary of suicide, in fact, is the man condemned to death.

    That revolt gives life its value. Spread out over the whole length of a
    life, it restores its majesty to that life... The sigh of human pride is
    unequaled. No disparagement is of any use. That disciple that the mind
    imposes on itself, that will conjured up out of nothing, that face-to-face
    struggle have something exceptional about them... I understand then why the
    doctrines that explain everything to me also debilitate me at the same time.
    They relieve me of the weight of my own life, and yet I must carry it alone.

    Consciousness and revolt, these rejections are the contrary of
    renunciation... It is essential to die unreconciled and not of one's own
    free will. Suicide is repudiation. The absurd man can only drain everything
    to the bitter end, and deplete himself. The absurd is his extreme tension,
    which he maintains constantly by solitary effort, for he knows that in
    consciousness and in that day-to-day revolt he gives proof of his only
    truth, which is defiance. This is a first consequence.

----

    If I remain that in that prearranged position which consists in drawing all
    the conclusions (and nothing else) involved in a newly discovered notion, I
    am faced with a second paradox. In order to remain faithful to that method,
    I have not to do with the problem of metaphysical liberty. Knowing whether
    or not man is free doesn't interest me. I can experience only my own
    freedom.

    ... I cannot understand what kind of freedom would be given me by a higher
    being...
    
    ...Now if the absurd cancels all my chances of eternal freedom, it
    restores and magnifies on the other hand, my freedom of action. That
    privation of hope and future means an increase in man's availability.

    Before encountering the absurd, the everyday man lives with aims, a concern
    for the future or for justification... In truth, he acts as if he were free,
    even if all the facts make a point of contradicting that liberty. But after
    the absurd, everything is upset. The idea that "I am," my way of acting as
    if everything has a meaning -- all that is given the lie in vertiginous
    fashion by the absurdity of a possible death. Thinking of the future,
    establishing aims for oneself, having preferences -- all this presupposes a
    belief in freedom, even if one occasionally ascertains that one doesn't feel
    it.

    But at the same time the absurd man realizes that hitherto he was bound to
    that postulate of freedom on the illusion of which he was living. In a
    certain sense, that hampered him. To the extent to which he imagined a
    purpose to his life, he adapted himself to the demands of a purpose to be
    achieved and became the slave of his liberty... Thus the absurd man realizes
    he was not really free. To speak clearly, to the extent to which I hope, to
    which I worry about a truth that might be individual to me, about a way of
    being or creating, to the extent to which I arrange my life and prove
    thereby that I accept its having a meaning, I create for myself barriers
    between which I confine my life.

    The absurd enlightens me on this point: there is no future. Henceforth is
    the reason for my inner freedom. I shall use two comparisons here. Mystics,
    to begin with, find freedom in giving themselves. By losing themselves in
    their god, by accepting his rules, they become secretly free. In
    spontaneously accepted slavery, they recover a deeper independence...
    Likewise, completely turned toward death, the absurd man feels related from
    everything outside that passionate attention crystallizing in him.

The Absurd Man
================================================================================

Don Juanism
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Drama
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Conquest
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Absurd Creation
================================================================================

Philosophy and Fiction
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Kirilov
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Ephemeral Creations
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

The Myth of Sisyphus
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Ideas
********************************************************************************

Absurdity
================================================================================

